Livestock Vaccine Production Falters


It is not precluded that Russia will soon become a victim 
of a grandiose biological disaster. Our country is bringing this disaster on 
itself. Everything is already in place and only one small detail remains: just 
keep up a little longer not giving money for the production of vaccines against 
the Siberian plague (anthrax), swine plague, brucellosis and other infections to 
which the animals which we consume are exposed. 
"I have a `nonaggression pact' with chickens," declared my friend when I offered 
her a fried chicken leg as a snack. 
After hearing her tales of very severe poisonings from an ordinary omelet, I 
began to look apprehensively at the chicken eggs in stores. 
And to no purpose. 

Until very recently it was virtually impossible to be infected with any 
"chicken" or "cow" disease in Russia. Because there existed a whole branch of 
the biological industry which was concerned with the protection of animals and 
poultry against infections. And protecting people against sick animals. 
The fact is that animals get sick far more frequently than do people. And their 
diseases are more fatal. And accordingly an absolutely essential condition for 
the health of any domestic animal is inoculations. Until recently more than 200 
vaccines were produced. In better times they were produced by 26 bioenterprises 
in the former USSR. Today 12 have remained, all of them in Russia. 
It is said that medicine treats man and veterinary medicine treats mankind. The 
agrobiological industry marked its hundredth anniversary last year. In honor of 
such an event the Russian government wished the workers of the bioenterprises 
"good health, well-being and further successes for the welfare of Russia" and 
put a complete end to their funding. Probably as a gift. 

As a point of reference: under the Russian Federation law "On Veterinary 
Medicine" a considerable part of vaccine production is being supplied to 
agriculture and livestock farms and is being paid for from the federal budget. 
To be more precise, has been paid for in the past. Because during the entire 
past year preparations against particularly dangerous animal diseases have been 
shipped without payment being received. 

Possibly precisely now, as you read these lines, the electricity is being cut 
off at the Shchelkovo Biocombine, one of the 12, for lack of payment. This sort 
of thing is not that uncommon. With only one exception: any plant or factory can 
be started up again. The stopping of biological production means the death of 
production. Because it is living organisms which are being dealt with. Deprived 
of heat and light, the subdued viruses -- strains, the basis for vaccine 
production, will perish. 

The Shchelkovo Biocombine produces a vaccine against the swine plague. Because 
of the plague vaccine, Russia up to this point has succeeded in avoiding 
epidemics of this frightful disease. In Luxembourg, say the newspapers, only 
quite recently one single piglet picked up this infection. The disease 
instantaneously afflicted 20 pig farms. The financial losses amounted to about 
$90 million. 

If the strains for antiplague vaccine perish or its production comes to a halt 
for other reasons the government will have to purchase it abroad at a price 
several times, if not ten times, exceeding the cost of the Russian product. But 
for more than a year there has been no money in the treasury even for our cheap 
vaccine. The government has already run up a bill with "Rosagrobioprom" 
enterprises of more than 70 billion rubles [R]. 
The inoculations not performed inevitably bear the threat of a plague epidemic 
which may come sooner than later. And then the losses will be such that 
alongside them -- and the comparison will be acknowledged by everyone -- the 70 
unpaid billion will seem like a drop in the bucket. How much money is needed in 
order to eradicate a raging virus? After all, it is necessary to kill not only 
sick animals, but also those suspected of being diseased, the meat of swine must 
be incinerated, their fodder must be destroyed and not only the buildings, but 
part of the general area must be disinfected. Not counting the money spent on 
medicines necessary for the immunization of livestock on adjacent farms. 
And if it is taken into account that until recently the biocombine grew microbes 
for vaccines against the hoof and mouth disease and against brucellosis, a dry 
vaccine against Marek's disease and also for 56 other preparations, and Russian 
veterinary medicine is suddenly deprived of them all, it is difficult even to 
conceive of the scale of the catastrophe. 

In connection with the special importance of their products, the bioenterprises 
producing veterinary immunological preparations are in federal ownership and are 
not subject to privatization. In 1991 they were brought together in the 
"Rosagrobioprom" consortium. Later, in conformity to a presidential decree, they 
became a Russian joint-stock company (RAO); as before, these very same 12 
enterprises remained founders of the RAO. 
First the directors of the bioenterprises stopped paying wages to their workers. 
Later they stopped paying on loans. Next they stopped paying for the raw 
materials and chemical reagents needed for fabrication of biopreparations. Then 
for electricity and telephone calls. 

The city administration stubbornly insisted on payment of all taxes, even for 
money not received, including for wages not paid and for profits not received. 
The local authorities also were not troubled by the circumstance that the 
livestock farms in their own territorial jurisdictions receive many vaccines 
free of charge. Not from generosity, but for the purpose of saving production, 
Nikolay Skichko, director of the Shchelkovo Biocombine, gave to the oblast 
leaders an outright royal gift: he conveyed to municipal ownership a school, two 
kindergartens, a hospital and a house of culture. The biosettlement, in former 
times maintained in such good order that there was no waiting list for quarters, 
was on the brink of ruination. In this way it could be saved. For example, by 
respecializing and beginning to produce an expensive polyvalent dog vaccine, 
enjoying good demand, instead of a vaccine against the hoof and mouth disease. 
But there is a risk that while making a good profit the door also is being left 
open to the hoof and mouth disease. 
Forgetting about their professorial titles and doctoral degrees, the directors 
of Russian bioenterprises have learned to conduct negotiations in pleading 
tones. 

"We'll pay for the calves, just wait a bit longer...," urged Nikolay Skichko 
over the telephone to suppliers at the "Krasnyy putilovets" State Farm in Tversk 
Oblast, who the day before had sent two truckloads of calves. 
"Well, for the time being you'll have to give us at least a million," asked the 
state farm representative. 
"We'll give the million, come on in," sighed the director. 
"And you're paying us a pretty sad price," said the woman at the other end of 
the line, almost weeping. 
The last money the combine had was handed out by Skichko to the driver of its 
"Alki," a semitrailer with a refrigerator transporting antirabies and other 
vaccines to Astrakhan, Volgograd and Rostov-na-Donu. 
Aleksandr Shurygin, vice president of the RAO "Rosagrobioprom" was that day in 
his office with me. 
"Is it possible that we are doing this to no purpose?" he asked of me as if in 
some doubt. 

In actuality, the vice president did not doubt the correctness of his decisions. 
Once a director, it's not important just who, but one of the twelve, gray from 
despair, himself not having received a ruble for the third month, came to 
Moscow, to the ministry, and stated: "That's it, we can't give anything more 
away free!!!" They answered him: "That cannot be done." 
The fact is that bioproduction is a living industry. It cannot be stopped. It 
can perish. It's simpler with miners: go on strike today, tomorrow go back to 
work. If the workers at bioenterprises do not go to work today tomorrow there is 
nothing to return to. 

If a one-day chick is not inoculated against Marek's disease, a two-day chick 
cannot be inoculated, it is useless. Today, to be sure, immunopreparations 
cannot be dispatched to Astrakhan, Volgograd and Rostov-na-Donu, especially 
since the farms have no money even to pick them up, much less to pay for them. 
But after a month the vaccines lose their period of effectiveness. The animals 
remain uninoculated. And the misfortune is not even that they fall ill 
frequently. They also fall ill in silence. It is possible simply not to notice 
the onset of the disease. And then it's too late, an epidemic, and this is no 
exaggeration, spreads like wildfire. Not one director, being a specialist in the 
bioproduction field, within his powers will allow this to occur. 
Let's take the hoof and mouth disease, for example. At this same Shchelkovo 
Combine it lives in a nutrient medium, including mineral salts, vitamins and 
amino acids -- a total of 17 components. The growing of the hoof and mouth 
disease virus is considered particularly dangerous. In a sterile zone, where 
there are enormous cultivators with the microbe (weighing more than a ton), even 
the pressure is lower so that in the event of depressurization the virus will 
not be able to "escape." It is possible to enter this zone only after taking a 
shower and completely changing clothes. Accordingly, we admired the fermenters 
with the virus through a glass wall. 

Deprived of the possibility of working, the specialists estimated the future 
losses in the example of this same hoof and mouth disease. Calculations by the 
All-Russian Scientific Research Institute for the Protection of Animals of the 
Russian Ministry of Agricultural Production indicated that the preventable 
economic loss from this disease in Krasnodar Kray in 1995 was more than R14 
billion. Every ruble spent on immunization yields a saving of R20. 
According to calculations pertaining to hoof and mouth disease made by the US 
Department of Agriculture the ratio proved to be a little less, 1:15.7. 
In 1995 Ramenye Rayon in Moscow Oblast lacked the half-billion rubles required 
for the prevention of this disease. The eradication of the focus of the hoof and 
mouth disease there then "ate up" R14 billion. 

All these and many other figures were cited in letters to the Ministry of 
Finance and the government of the Russian Federation. Everywhere they found 
sympathy and support. But nowhere was money found. 
A gesture of desperation. A telegram to Chernomyrdin. And wonder of wonders! A 
telegram was dispatched to the Ministry of Finance, to the then-time minister V. 
Panskov, with the prime minister's firm statement: "Taking into account the 
special importance of the matter, I ask that it be looked into and that a 
positive solution be found." This took place in March of last year. 
You probably also thought that implementation of such a resolution was 
mandatory? No answer at all was received to a subsequent letter of V. Khlystun, 
Minister of Agriculture, to the Minister of Finance A. Livshits. 
In business everything is simple: no money means no goods. But when the 
government does not pay, what to do? Submit it to an arbitrage court? 
So it turned out that there was no money, but there was vaccine. 
The government's problems were solved due to the responsibility and competence 
of the directors of "Rosagrobioprom" and at the expense of the prosperity of the 
families of bioenterprise workers. But the veterinary needs cannot remain 
covered forever. Although this has continued a long time, to the point that 
agrobiological production is on the brink of total and final collapse. 
The assembler Benderu Mechnikov explained this: "In the morning -- money, in the 
evening a chair." The reverse, to be sure, is possible. But you pay first. 
But it's a different matter: it's not a question of money, not a question of 
chairs. We're talking about vaccines. 

At the same time this philanthropy has not perforce been extended to the former 
union republics, which do not have their own bioenterprises. It is difficult to 
conceive that Moldavia, Uzbekistan or Azerbaijan are better off than Russia, but 
each year they look for money in the budget for the purchase of vaccines, sera 
and diagnosticums. This year only Turkmenia did not purchase immunopreparations 
from "Rosagrobioprom," since it acquired them in Israel. 
Only the Russian government for some reason or another is not too concerned 
about the health of its people. And that's also strange. Since the virus crosses 
national boundaries without asking permission. Beginning in Russia, an epidemic 
almost immediately becomes a problem for its immediate neighbors. 
But there's more. The leaders of the agrobioindustry assert that in the 
situation as it has developed it is impossible to give the branch a little, or a 
part, or half that money -- R73 billion -- owed to it by the government. For one 
very simple reason: approximately 30 billion, finally paid to the 
bioenterprises, would automatically pass into the hands of the numerous 
creditors of "Rosagrobioprom" enterprises. 
And once again: no money, no vaccines. 
This spring both large animals and sheep and pigs and rabbits and poultry remain 
without inoculations. And this threatens more than their large-scale death. 
Humans also may fall ill: with rabies, anthrax, brucellosis, tuberculosis, 
leptospirosis... 

And however much the government guys have tried to act as if nothing is going 
on, the fact is that not all of them are exceptional veterinarians. And a virus 
is not a governmental entity, it in no way responds to the red-blue-white flag, 
and whose minds and bodies it attacks, be it that of ordinary people or 
government officials, is a matter of complete indifference to such a virus. 
So that money is now necessary not for support of the bioindustry and not for 
the extinction of indebtedness, but for the liquidation of an extraordinary 
situation. 

Well, for the time being, while officials of the Ministry of Finance, who also 
have no fear of the plague, are resolving the almost Hamletian question: to give 
or not to give money to the RAO "Rosagrobioprom," I also personally, in any 
case, am signing a "nonaggression pact with meat, milk and eggs." 
Which is what I advise you to do. 
P. S. When this issue of the paper had been prepared for the press we received 
alarming information: unexpected hoof and mouth disease outbreaks have been 
reported in Georgia and Kirgizia. 
Has it begun? 
